Welcome back.
The question of why things happen is at
the core of just about everything we do
in analytics.
Whether we're looking at what happened in
the past, what will happen in the future,
or what we should do about it,
it's in our nature to seek to
understand what's really going on.
We want to know why.
We want to know what cause
something to happen or
what will cause something to happen.
Not only does that knowledge help us
today, but it helps grow our understanding
of how things work and
informs how we think about our business.
However, the real world is complicated and
really
understanding the causes of the events
we see is much easier said than done.
In this video, we're going to talk about
the ideas of correlation and causation and
address one of the most common errors
that occurs in analytical work,
specifically mistaking one for the other.
So what is correlation?
In the simplest terms,
correlation is a mutual connection or
relationship between two or more things.
When we think about correlation in
analytics we're usually referring to how
we see characteristics vary in
relationship to each other.
When one measure is higher or lower does
another measure vary in a consistent or
predictable way?
If so
we'd say the measures are correlated.
The simplest way we normally see
correlation is when we plot the values of
one measure or variable versus another.
Here's an example.
Here we have a plot of average
height versus average weight for
women in the United States.
As we might expect as height increases so
does weight.
In fact, the relationship between the two
almost looks like a straight line or
what we call a linear relationship.
However, there are number of regular and
irregular patterns we might see
when looking for relationships.
Here are a few.
Some of these are positive correlations,
like the log, exponential, power, and
logistic patterns.
In these patterns, when one value
goes up the other value also goes up.
Some are negative correlations,
like the negative linear and
negative exponential pattern.
In these patterns when one value
goes up the other value goes down.
And the others are more complicated.
The quadratic, threshold step, and
cyclical patterns all suggest
a relationship between the two values.
When we're dealing with data in
the real world the relationships we see
aren't this clean.
There's usually some noise or
variation in our measures, so
our visualizations are a bit fuzzier.
As we can see in this example diagram the
strength of a correlation we see can be
stronger or weaker depending on how
tightly related that values are.
These examples of variations
on a linear relationship.
But the same would be true around any of
the other types of patterns we'd observe.
There are more specific measures of
correlation that apply in statistics and
mathematics.
The most common is the Pearson Correlation
Coefficient, which measures the degree
to which there is a linear
relationship between two variables.
We usually see this value
represented by the letter r.
Now, our objective in this video is not
to get too deep into the math itself, so
we won't be presenting the equation
that we use to calculate r.
But to make a long story short, if we have
two set of measures that are perfectly
positively correlated, we have r=1,
like the first diagram.
Conversely if our measures
are perfectly negatively correlated,
we have r=-1 like the last diagram.
And if there is no correlation at all
we have r=0 like the middle diagram.
Of course it's generally the case that
we see something that's in between like
the remaining cases.
You might recall a similar measure that
shows up in the result of a linear
regression.
Usually there's something called
coefficient of determination or
r squared which is just a square of r.
And like r, it's a measure of the strength
of an observed relationship between two
sets of values.
We bring it up here just so you make
the connection to that type of analysis.
It's not uncommon for someone to show up
with a regression analysis that has a high
r squared value and
who wants to jump straight to causality.
Since causality is what we really
wanted to get after anyway,
let's shift gears a bit and
talk a little bit about that.
Causation means that one event or
state is the result of the occurrence
of another event or state.
In other words there is a cause in effect
relationship between two or more ideas.
When we see data that applied
a relationship a causal relationship is
one option for what's really going on.
But it's not the only one.
Let's assume we have two ideas A and B and
we've observe a correlation between them.
How might A and B actually be related?
Well, we might suggest that A causes B.
Conversely, we could also
suggest that B causes A.
However, it could also be the case
that there is a third factor,
let's call it C,
that actually causes both A and
B, such that there really is no
causal relationship between A and B.
It's also possible that A does cause B or
vice versa but
the causation actually happens
through C as an intermediate factor.
Finally it can also be the case that
there's actually no relationship at all
and what we are seeing in
the data is pure coincidence.
This is where we sometimes
get ourselves into trouble.
As data analyst,
we're kind of hardwired to believe that
there's an answer in the data somewhere.
And it makes it really hard to accept that
there might not actually be a relationship
in something that might look
clearly related to our eye.
But it turns out that it's not too hard
to find examples of two things that seem
to correlate almost perfectly
with each other, but
which in fact are completely unrelated.
If you haven't already visited Tyler
Vigen's Spurious Correlations website,
I suggest you pause this video and take
a few minutes to scroll through some of
the more entertaining
examples of this you'll find.
For those of you who can't get there now,
here are a few examples.
Each one of these show a high degree
of correlation between two completely
unrelated sets of value.
So, the point here is we need to resist
the urge to assume relationships exist,
when it's possible they don't.
The other mistake we tend to make is that
we get too focused on the ideas we have in
front of us and forget to consider
the influence of other factors.
The specific error I see more than any
other is assuming a causal relationship
between two characteristic or
events when there's really a third factor
causing them both or
this relationship we saw earlier.
Let's illustrate this using an example.
Let's say that we're a wireless carrier,
and
we're trying to assess the impact of
people accessing their account online.
Among other things, we look at the simple
relationship between historical account
access by an individual and
the likelihood that the individual
will cancel their service.
What we basically find is that people
who have accessed their account or
half is likely to cancel.
The business manager in charge of
customer attention says, this is great!
All we need to do is,
incent people to use the web and
we could reduce our cancel rate by half.
What's wrong with this interpretation?
Well, it depends on whether or not you
believe that the act of accessing the web
is influencing someone's
likelihood to cancel.
It turns out that it's far more
likely that a third factor like age,
comfort with technology, or just
willingness to engage with the company,
is driving both the likelihood to use
the web and the likelihood to cancel.
Simply incenting people to use
the web isn't likely to change
any of these underlying causal factors and
therefore isn't likely to have
an impact on cancellation.
This may seem like a really obvious
example but it actually happened.
In fact I've seen this exact scenario and
rationale around web accessing
cancellation come up not just once but
at least
three times in three different places
during my time in the wireless industry.
So it definitely happens.
Even very smart people can
make silly mistakes sometimes.
So how do we avoid mistaking
correlation for causation?
Is there a way we can prove that
causation does in fact exist?
More often than not, the answer is no.
Proving causation is pretty hard.
But what we can do is eliminate alternate
explanations either through context or
by showing empirically that
other relationships can exist.
In our web cancellation example, we
used reasoning based on our knowledge of
the industry and likely customer behavior
to question the assumption of causality.
Again, context turns out to be critical
and interpreting relationships and data.
It should be the first line of
defense in avoiding mistakes.
Can we think of any other plausible
explanations for what we see?
Is there any other data that would
contradict and assume the relationship?
We can also apply simple ideas
like temporal precedence.
For a relationship to be causal,
the causing factor needs to be
present before we see the effect.
If we see something that we think is
an effect happen before its cause,
we know that we have
the wrong relationship.
It turns out that one of the best ways to
isolate causation is to run a controlled
experiment.
In a simple controlled experiment,
I normally isolate two randomly
selected groups of subjects and
apply treatment to one group while not
applying that treatment to the other.
I call this the treatment in
control groups respectively.
I then observe differences
between the two groups.
If I observe a difference between the
treatment and the control and I've ensured
that the only thing that differed between
the groups is the treatment that was
applied, then I have strong evidence that
the treatment caused the difference.
If we have the luxury of an experiment
that's great, but if we don't,
we fall back on our context, logic and
alternate explanation based approaches for
assessing causality.
So let's circle back to where we started.
As a analyst where constantly
asking the question why and
finding causal relationships and data
is big part of answering that question.
But it is important to recognize
the pitfall that we can fall into and
mistaking correlation for causation.
In this module we'll continue
to explore ways we can fail to
interpret data correctly, and learn
what we can do to avoid those mistakes.
[BLANK AUDIO]